# “DOESN’T TIME FLY?” – A BRIEF LOOK AT CONCEPTUAL METAPHOR

**INTRODUCTION**

“Conceptual metaphors have been found in virtually every language
examined thus far, both in contemporary spoken and signed languages, as
well as throughout history going back to the hieroglyphics in Egypt,
ancient Chinese, and early Greek and Roman writings” (Gibbs, 2011, p.
533). However, since the publication of Lakoff and Johnson's seminal
work on conceptual metaphor, *Metaphors We Live By (1980),* there has
been a rapid increase of interest in metaphor studies in the fields of
linguistics and cognitive science. Unlike the scholars who preceded
them, Lakoff and Johnson systematically laid down evidence to support
the claim that metaphors can transcend their roles as figures of speech
and shape our cognition.

Lakoff and Johnson’s findings are often debated by critics who claim
that their methodology and assumptions were flawed. However, a bigger
debate is in place - does our language influence or shape our cognition?
This idea of Linguistic Relativity is often attributed to Benjamin Lee
Whorf and even today, it remains as a highly contested concept. In this
short paper, I will explore this idea through the study of the
*conceptual metaphor*, specifically focusing on its implications on
biculturals and bilinguals.

**THE CONCEPTUAL METAPHOR**

“Our ordinary conceptual system, in terms of which we both think and
act, is fundamentally metaphorical in nature” (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980,
p. 454). Often in language, abstract concepts such as time, love etc.
are described metaphorically. This allows us to map over attributes from
a well-defined domain (source), such as motion, to a less well-defined
one (target) such as time. A simple example of such a conceptual
metaphor would be LOVE AS A NATURAL FORCE (Gibbs, 2011, p. 531), as
exhibited in the following expressions:

1. “She *swept me off* my feet.”

2. “*Waves of passion* overcame him.”

3. “We were *engulfed by* love.”

4. “She was deeply *immersed in* love.”

The fact that we in part conceptualize love in this manner, influences
the way we talk about love and how we experience it. In fact, the same
target domain can be described using conceptual metaphors from a
different source domain:

1. “This relationship is a *dead-end street*.”

2. “It's been a *long*, *bumpy* *road*.”

3. “We're at a *crossroads*.”

4. “I don't think this relationship is *going anywhere*.”

5. “We are *spinning our wheels*.”

Here we see the same concept, love being described as a journey and the
relationship as the vehicle carrying the two people. The problems faced
in the relationship are described as problems one faces in a journey.

**INFLUENCE ON COGNITION**

A case for linguistic relativity can be made based on conceptual
metaphors potentially influencing the speakers’ cognition of a
particular domain. In Boroditsky’s words, “Language can be a powerful
tool for shaping abstract thought. When sensory information is scarce or
inconclusive, languages may play the most important role in shaping how
their speakers think” (2011, p. 20).

Along the same lines, Lakoff and Johnson (1980) claim that the use of
metaphors greatly influences our basis of thinking. They present this
using their classical example of the metaphor – ARGUMENT IS WAR:

1.  Your claims are *indefensible*.

2.  He *attacked* every weak point in my argument.

3.  His criticisms were *right on target*.

4.  He *shot down* all my arguments

According to Lakoff and Johnson (1980, p. 455), this conceptualization
of arguments as war leads us to see the person we are arguing with as an
opponent, his arguments as attacks and ours as defensive strategies. In
our culture, many actions involved during argumentation are partially
structured by the concept of war. Hence to a large extent, conceptual
metaphors influence our cognition. In a culture where argumentation is
not described as a battle but as a means of knowledge acquisition which
benefits both the participants, such an attack-defense interpretation of
argumentation would almost certainly not be accepted.

Another remarkable observation which suggests that humans’ comprehension
of the world is metaphorical is that the linguistic analyses of the
origin of many polysemous words show that many of them were derived from
conceptual metaphors (Gibbs, 2011, p. 532). For example, the meaning of
“seeing” referring to knowing or understanding can be traced back to the
metaphor UNDERSTANDING IS SEEING.

Although widely-accepted, Lakoff and Johnson’s claims about conceptual
metaphors influencing cognition have not gone uncontested. Glucksberg &
McGlone (1999) and McGlone (2007) criticize the assumptions of their
arguments and contest it due to its lack of empirical support. Others
such as Zoltan Kövecses (2008 p. 168) criticize the methodology used to
study conceptual metaphors. But perhaps the most notable contestation to
the importance of conceptual metaphors in linguistic relativity comes
from Vervaeke & Kennedy (1996).

In their article titled “Metaphors in Language and Thought:
Falsification and Multiple Meanings”, Vervaeke & Kennedy directly
challenge the impact of implicit metaphors on our cognition. They
propose the following example (p. 279):

1.  “Don't go off half-cocked.”

2.  “I have you in my sights.”

3.  “Bill shot his mouth off again.”

4.  “Mary is a real pistol.”

5.  “Fred has a hair-trigger temper.”

6.  “Mark is very explosive.”

7.  “He is deadly.”

8.  “She is a real killer.”

    They claim that a theorist supporting the theory of conceptual
    metaphors would probably conclude that these expressions should be
    explained by the implicit metaphor - PEOPLE ARE WEAPONS (p. 279).
    However, this claim is insufficient to jump to the conclusion that
    this conceptual metaphor about people being weapons influences our
    comprehension of people. It is entirely possible that this is just a
    product of several independent common metaphors.

    Furthermore, Vervaeke & Kennedy argue that (p. 280) one term can
    have different senses in different contexts. For example, the word,
    *“attack”* is synonymous to both *“assault”* and *“criticize”* and
    yet the two words are not synonymous. Hence, the same word,
    *“attack”* now has two different senses which are domain specific.
    For example.

<!-- -->

1.  We *attacked* the castle.

2.  We *assaulted* their castle.

3.  We *charged* the castle.

<!-- -->

1.  He *attacked* my argument.

2.  \* He *assaulted* my argument.

3.  \* He *charged* my argument.

(\* failure to use synonymous terms from the military domain to describe
argumentation)

We observe that the transfer of one term from one domain to another is
not successful because they both have different senses in their
respective domains. This indicates that “*attack*” is not used
metaphorically when used in the context of argumentation. There we use
“*attack*” in a very nonmilitary sense. In fact, this creation of this
new nonmilitary sense of the word *“attack”* has granted the term a very
abstract meaning such that one can use “*attack”* without thinking
metaphorically. “One simply uses this new sense with its own relevance”
(Vervaeke & Kennedy, p. 282). Hence, conceptual metaphors may not
influence cognition as we thought earlier.

**EMPERICAL STUDIES**

This dispute about conceptual metaphors and their impact cognition is a
complicated one. Vervaeke & Kennedy’s criticism of the theory saw a
reply from Ritchie (2003) who claims that they had considered only a
narrow range of reasonable extensions and interpretations of their
examples (p.126). The relationship between conceptual metaphors and
cognition however, still remains unclear. But, cognitive science and
psycholinguistic studies provide some interesting insights on the issue.

One developmental idea is that people create embodied simulations
(partial or complete) of the speakers’ metaphorical messages to decode
the implications of the used conceptual metaphors (Gibbs, 2011, p. 550).
This can even be observed for abstract language such as “grasping the
concept” when the idea cannot be physically realized. Various
experimental studies provide evidence to support this idea. Gibbs, Gould
and Andric (2006) observed that performing or imagining an action (for
example the act of grasping in the case of *“grasping the concept”*)
enhanced comprehension or mental imagery for metaphorical action
phrases. Richardson & Matlock (2007) conducted an experiment to observe
how eye-movement patterns (while looking at a static image) were
affected by figurative language. They concluded that the use of a
metaphorical prompts such as “The road *runs through* the valley”
influenced the eye movements of participants significantly more than
literal prompts such as “The road *is in* the valley”.

Both these experiments suggest the involvement of simulations to make
sense of the conceptual metaphor. In fact, this also implies that people
do not just access pre-encoded conceptual metaphors from memory but
create interpretations for it during the moment of comprehension itself.
Hence, conceptual metaphors can indeed be seen to have an impact on our
cognition.

**IMPLICATIONS ON BILINGUALS AND BICULTURALS**

So, it can be seen that many studies suggest that conceptual metaphor is
indeed germane to linguistic relativity. But what is not known in detail
is how do these conceptual metaphors impact biculturals and bilinguals.
Depending on the similarities between the languages and the proficiency
of the speaker in these languages, we can generally classify this impact
of conceptual metaphors into two broad categories – affirmation and
contradiction.

**AFFIRMATION**

Affirmation occurs when the metaphorical representations of an idea in
two different languages lead to a similar conceptualization. A simple
example of this would be the metaphor, MIND IS A BODY. The following
expressions can be observed in English and Chinese:

1.  Thinking is moving:

    1.  English: My mind was racing

    2.  Chinese: si-lu (thinking road/path)

2.  Thinking is perceiving/seeing:

    1.  English: I can see what you are saying

    2.  Chinese: kan-fa (see-method)

3.  Thinking is moving objects:

    1.  Let’s toss around some ideas

    2.  sixiang jiaoliu (thought exchange)

We see that both Chinese and English metaphors ascribe similar
attributes to thinking. For a bilingual proficient in Chinese in
English, this similarity will affirm his conception of thinking
regardless of his proficiency and frequency of use of the languages.
Furthermore, this is likely to concretize his use of conceptual
metaphors of thought in both the languages.

**CONTRADICTION**

Contradiction simply occurs when the metaphorical representations of the
same concept differ in two languages. This can have varying influences
on a bicultural/bilingual’s cognition and use of language depending on
his proficiency, frequency of use and cultural inclinations. These
influences in turn can be broadly classified as – overriding and
overloading.

**OVERRIDING**

When the metaphorical representations of the same concepts contradict in
two languages, bilinguals often reject (consciously or otherwise) the
less dominant one and only retain the representation from the language
that they either learnt earlier in their life or use more frequently. If
equally proficient in both, a bilingual might also reject a
representation because of his cultural inclinations. To examine this, I
conducted a simple experiment. Several Hindi-English
bicultural-bilinguals from different states in India were asked the
following:

“If a meeting scheduled for Wednesday is pushed back two days, what day
will it fall on?”

The vast majority of the participants who use Hindi as their primary
means of communication hesitated and many asked for clarifications.
Participants responded with “Monday and “Friday” about the same number
of times. One might assume that this is because the conceptual
understanding of time differs in Hindi and English. However, in both
Hindi and English, conceptual metaphors describe time it to be linear:

1.  English: “Move *forward* in time” or “Go *back* to the past”

2.  Hindi: समय आगे बढ़ता है (Time moves forward)

The contradicting issue is hence not the linearity of time but the
concept of pushing an event which does not appear in Hindi. Instead in
Hindi, changing the date or time of an event is described as plucking an
event from a point in time and putting it in another point. When the
question was changed to “pushed two days” instead of “pushed back two
days”, more participants were able to answer correctly because despite
the fact that “pushing an event” seems bizarre to a Hindi speaker, most
of them interpreted pushing as moving something in the forward direction
and since metaphorically, future is described to be forward in Hindi,
the participants inferred that pushing meant moving the event in the
future and pulling probably meant moving the event earlier.

Here we observe that despite being regularly exposed to English through
conversations, entertainment and the social media, many Hindi-English
bilinguals’ conception of pushing an event in has been overridden by a
more dominant representation offered by Hindi.

**OVERLOADING**

Bilinguals and biculturals can also deal with contradiction of
metaphorical representations by retaining both the conceptualizations
and deploying one according to the language and the cultural setting of
a conversation. In Hindi, some commonly used conceptual metaphors are
LIGHT SOURCES (SUCH AS BULBS) ARE FLAMES and ELECTRICITY IS A PERSON. We
can observe the same from the following examples:

1.  बिजली चली गई (Electricity has left/gone)

2.  बिजली आ गई (Electricity has come back)

3.  बल्ब जला दो (Ignite the bulb)

4.  बल्ब बुझा दो (Blow off the bulb)

Most Hindi-English bilinguals however are aware that mapping of
attributes from a flame to a bulb does not exist in English, and hence
when speaking in English, they would most likely use the terms “switch
on” and “switch off”. However, it is interesting to note that even when
speaking English, if the audience mostly consists of Hindi-English
bilinguals, some conceptual metaphors can be brought over by the speaker
from Hindi into English. It is not uncommon to hear phrases like
“Electricity has gone again for two days” spoken by Hindi-English
bilinguals because of mutual understanding of the metaphor between the
audience and the speaker.

**CONCLUSION**

The theoretical and empirical studies about conceptual metaphor and its
relevance to linguistic relativity will continue to be debated upon.
Despite that, viewing our cognition as a metaphorical one allows us to
understand and answer some important questions about our reality and why
different cultures views certain ideas and concepts as they do. And
although the theory of conceptual metaphors does not account for all
occurrences of metaphors in language, it lays a firm foundation for
future studies in linguistics and cognitive science to help us
understand human cognition better.

**BIBLIOGRAPHY**

1. Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does Language Shape Thought?: Mandarin and
English Speakers' Conceptions of Time. Cognitive Psychology, 43(1),
1-22.

2. Cameron, D. (2003). Language: Linguistic relativity: Benjamin Lee Whorf
and the return of the repressed. Critical Quarterly, 41(2), 153-156.

3. Gibbs, R. W. (2011). Evaluating Conceptual Metaphor Theory. Discourse
Processes, 48 (8), 529-562.

4. Gibbs, R. W., Gould, J. J., Andric, M. (2006), Imagining Metaphorical
Actions: Embodied simulations make the impossible plausible.
Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 25(3), 221-238.

5. Glucksberg, S., & McGlone, M. S. (1999). When love is not a journey:
What metaphors mean. Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 1541-1558.

6. Kövecses, Z. (2008). Conceptual metaphor theory: Some criticisms and
alternative proposals. Annual Review of Cognitive Linguistics, 6(1), 168
–184.

7. Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

8. Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). The Metaphorical Structure of the
Human Conceptual System. Cognitive Science, 4, 195-208.

9. Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Conceptual Metaphor in Everyday
Language. The Journal of Philosophy, 77(8), 453-486.

10. McGlone, M. S. (2007). What is the explanatory value of a conceptual
metaphor? Language & Communication. 27(2), 109-126.

11. Richardson, D. & Matlock, T. (2007). The integration of figurative
language and static depictions: An eye movement study of fictive motion.
Cognition, 102, 129-38.

12. Ritchie, D. (2003b). “ARGUMENT IS WAR” – Or is it a game of chess?
Multiple meanings in the analysis of implicit metaphors. Metaphor and
Symbol, 18, 125-146.

13. Vervaeke, J., & Kennedy, J. M. (1996). Metaphors in language and
thought: Falsification and multiple meanings. Metaphor and Symbolic
Activity, 11, 273-284.
